README.md, before:

# ![maug Icon](maug.png) maug

Augmented minimal standard library for C89 and legacy compilers.

**The API is currently in flux and is not yet completely final!**

Current maug-based projects may be found under [The maug topic on GitHub](https://github.com/topics/maug)!

## Requirements

### All Platforms

- xxd
- GNU make
- ImageMagick convert

**TODO**: List platform-specific requirements.

**TODO**: Platform-specific compiler setup.

## Design Constraints

Maug has the following design goals and constraints:

- Must work in C89 compilers. C99-like features like stdint or snprintf are
  available by internal implementation.
- Memory allocation uses a flat model (calloc/free), with no handle management.
- Standard library calls are allowed, so long as they are universally
  available even in very old C89 compilers.

**TODO**: Describe layer architecture.

## Roadmap

- Clearly enumerate which headers rely on which to create modular hierarchy.

- Solidify API.

- Setup Makefile to compile .solib/.dll/.ovl dynamic libs.

- Square-tile-based isometric engine.

- Reimplement retrotile with vectors for tiledefs.

- Replace iffy semi-vectors in mhtml/mcss with vectors.

- Replace obj vertice arrays with vectors in retroglu.

- Implement lambdas in mlisp with separators for pruning sequentally added env args.

- Implement resolution detection in Windows CE.

- Implement timing/blit mode setting options on all platforms.

## Modules

### Makefiles

Application Makefiles should `include maug/Makefile.inc` to enable the build macros. From there, a target must be defined with `$(eval $(call <target>,<appname>))` for each platform to build for.

Many platforms support graphical application icons. These platforms will use \<appname\>.bmp if present, and the maug default icon if not.

Some platforms support OpenGL (1.1), noted below. GLUT can **only** be used with OpenGL. Platforms that do not mention OpenGL at all in the notes, do not support OpenGL. OpenGL support on the Nintendo DS is finnicky.

The following targets are currently available (possibly among others):

|Target                    | OS           | Cplr   | API       | Notes        |
|--------------------------|--------------|--------|-----------|--------------|
|TGTDOSALE                 | DOS          | Watcom | Allegro   |              |
|TGTDOSGAL                 | DOS          | DJGPP  | Allegro   |              |
|TGTDOSBIOS                | DOS          | Watcom | BIOS      |              |
|TGTNDSLIBN                | Nintendo DS  | GCC    | libn      | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTOS2GL                  | OS/2         | Watcom | GLUT      | OpenGL ONLY  |
|TGTOS2SDL                 | OS/2         | Watcom | SDL       |              |
|TGT\_WATCOM\_WIN32\_PLUG  | Windows NT   | Watcom | Win32     | Plugins only |
|TGT\_GCC\_UNIX\_PLUG      | UNIX         | GCC    | SDL       | Plugins only |
|TGTUNIXSDL                | UNIX         | GCC    | SDL       |              |
|TGTUNIXALE                | UNIX         | GCC    | Allegro   |              |
|TGTUNIXGLUT               | UNIX         | GCC    | GLUT      | OpenGL ONLY  |
|TGTWASMSDL                | Web          | emcc   | SDL       | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWINNT                  | Windows NT   | Watcom | Win32     | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWINGL                  | Windows NT   | Watcom | GLUT      | OpenGL ONLY  |
|TGTWINSDL                 | Windows NT   | Watcom | SDL       | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWIN16                  | Windows 3.x  | Watcom | Win16     |              |
|TGTWIN386                 | Windows 3.x  | Watcom | Win16     | 32-bit clean |
|TGTWINNTGCC               | Windows NT   | GCC    | Win32     | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWIN64GCC               | Windows NT   | GCC    | Win32     | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGT\_CECL\_WINCE\_SH3     | Windows CE   | VC     | WinCE     |              |
|TGT\_CECL\_WINCE\_MIPS    | Windows CE   | VC     | WinCE     |              |
|TGT\_CECL\_WINCE\_X86     | Windows CE   | VC     | WinCE     |              |

### retroflt

`#include <retroflt.h>`

RetroFlat is a rough, quick-and-dirty compatibility layer for making graphical programs that work on Win16 (32-bit via OpenWatcom's Win386), MS-DOS (32-bit via DOS/32a or DOS4GW via Allegro), and possibly other platforms in the future.

This documentation is also available at [https://indigoparadox.github.io/maug/group__maug__retroflt.html](https://indigoparadox.github.io/maug/group__maug__retroflt.html).

### mtypes

`#include <mtypes.h>`

Rough common approximation of types for interoperability between our projects.

Includes common types from stdint.h, guaranteed to be of the named size:

 * int8\_t
 * uint8\_t
 * int16\_t
 * uint16\_t
 * int32\_t
 * uint32\_t

When using this header, do not include stdint.h. This header will include it if the current platform supports it. Otherwise, it will improvise.

### uprintf

`#include <uprintf.h>`

An augmented printf for tracing, debugging, and error reporting.

To use, include uprintf.h and call `logging\_init()` in program startup.

Be sure to call `logging\_shutdown()` on program cleanup.

Logging can then be performed by calling:

 * `debug\_printf( lvl, format, ... )` - Prints debug message.
   * `lvl` - Immediacy level of debug message. See DEBUG\_THRESHOLD below.
   * `format` - `printf()`-style format string.
   * `...` - Variable arguments to `format`.
 * `error\_printf( format, ... )` - Prints to stderr.
   * `format` - `printf()`-style format string.
   * `...` - Variable arguments to `format`.

uprintf's behavior can be modified by defining the following before inclusion:

| Define            | Description                                             |
| ------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| platform\_file    | Type to use instead of stdlib's FILE for log ptr.       |
| platform\_fopen   | Function to use instead of fopen() to create a log ptr. |
| platform\_fclose  | Function to close log ptr.                              |
| platform\_fflush  | Function to flush log ptr to buffer.                    |
| platform\_fprintf | Function to print to log ptr with a format string.      |
| DEBUG\_THRESHOLD  | debug\_printf() w/ this or higher lvl will be displayed.|
| DEBUG\_LOG        | If defined, debug will be output to LOG\_FILE\_NAME.    |
| ANCIENT\_C        | Use static functions where vararg macros unsupported.   |

## Troubleshooting

### size of segment x exceeds 64k by y bytes

RetroFlat can be quite bulky for 16-bit DOS. Please try adding RETROFLAT\_DOS\_MEM\_LARGE=1 to your Makefile before Makefile.inc is included to enable a large code model.

### Cache loading errors which retrogxc.h is never included

For 16-bit builds, `GLOBAL\_DEFINES += -DRETROFLAT\_NO\_RETROGXC` must be specified in the Makefile explicitly, or the cache will be enabled in the DOS stubs.

### Emscripten in Debian Complains About FROZEN\_CACHE

Do the following, to create a mutable emscripten cache in your `$HOME`:

 - Make `$HOME/.emscripten` directory.
 - Copy `/usr/share/emscripten/cache/` to `$HOME/.emscripten/cache`
 - Copy `/usr/share/emscripten/.emscripten` to `$HOME/.emscripten/config`
 - In `$HOME/.emscripten/config`:
   * Set `FROZEN\_CACHE = False`.
   * Set `CACHE = '/home/username/.emscripten/cache'`, where `/home/username` is whatever `$HOME` expands to.

After doing this, building with emcc should work.

Commit message:

Notes on NDS platform-specific toolchain and indentation fix.

README.md, after:

# ![maug Icon](maug.png) maug

Augmented minimal standard library for C89 and legacy compilers.

**The API is currently in flux and is not yet completely final!**

Current maug-based projects may be found under [The maug topic on GitHub](https://github.com/topics/maug)!

## Requirements

### All Platforms

- xxd
- GNU make
- ImageMagick convert

**TODO**: List platform-specific requirements.

**TODO**: Platform-specific compiler setup.

### Nintendo DS

At the present, the Nintendo DS port will only build with a devkitpro toolchain circa 2022. This can be found at https://wii.leseratte10.de/devkitPro/ and some packages that work at minimum are:

- devkitARM r56
- libnds 1.8.1-2
- default\_arm7 0.7.4-4
- other-stuff/grit 0.9.2
- other-stuff/ndstool 2.1.2

And 1.2.0 of the linker scripts at https://github.com/devkitPro/devkitarm-crtls/releases/tag/v1.2.0 (these can just be installed with `make`/`make install`.

Work is in progress to update this, but the cause isn't obvious and time is in short supply these days!

## Design Constraints

Maug has the following design goals and constraints:

- Must work in C89 compilers. C99-like features like stdint or snprintf are
  available by internal implementation.
- Memory allocation uses a flat model (calloc/free), with no handle management.
- Standard library calls are allowed, so long as they are universally
  available even in very old C89 compilers.

**TODO**: Describe layer architecture.

## Roadmap

- Clearly enumerate which headers rely on which to create modular hierarchy.

- Solidify API.

- Setup Makefile to compile .solib/.dll/.ovl dynamic libs.

- Square-tile-based isometric engine.

- Reimplement retrotile with vectors for tiledefs.

- Replace iffy semi-vectors in mhtml/mcss with vectors.

- Replace obj vertice arrays with vectors in retroglu.

- Implement lambdas in mlisp with separators for pruning sequentally added env args.

- Implement resolution detection in Windows CE.

- Implement timing/blit mode setting options on all platforms.

## Modules

### Makefiles

Application Makefiles should `include maug/Makefile.inc` to enable the build macros. From there, a target must be defined with `$(eval $(call <target>,<appname>))` for each platform to build for.

Many platforms support graphical application icons. These platforms will use \<appname\>.bmp if present, and the maug default icon if not.

Some platforms support OpenGL (1.1), noted below. GLUT can **only** be used with OpenGL. Platforms that do not mention OpenGL at all in the notes, do not support OpenGL. OpenGL support on the Nintendo DS is finnicky.

The following targets are currently available (possibly among others):

|Target                    | OS           | Cplr   | API       | Notes        |
|--------------------------|--------------|--------|-----------|--------------|
|TGTDOSALE                 | DOS          | Watcom | Allegro   |              |
|TGTDOSGAL                 | DOS          | DJGPP  | Allegro   |              |
|TGTDOSBIOS                | DOS          | Watcom | BIOS      |              |
|TGTNDSLIBN                | Nintendo DS  | GCC    | libn      | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTOS2GL                  | OS/2         | Watcom | GLUT      | OpenGL ONLY  |
|TGTOS2SDL                 | OS/2         | Watcom | SDL       |              |
|TGT\_WATCOM\_WIN32\_PLUG  | Windows NT   | Watcom | Win32     | Plugins only |
|TGT\_GCC\_UNIX\_PLUG      | UNIX         | GCC    | SDL       | Plugins only |
|TGTUNIXSDL                | UNIX         | GCC    | SDL       |              |
|TGTUNIXALE                | UNIX         | GCC    | Allegro   |              |
|TGTUNIXGLUT               | UNIX         | GCC    | GLUT      | OpenGL ONLY  |
|TGTWASMSDL                | Web          | emcc   | SDL       | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWINNT                  | Windows NT   | Watcom | Win32     | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWINGL                  | Windows NT   | Watcom | GLUT      | OpenGL ONLY  |
|TGTWINSDL                 | Windows NT   | Watcom | SDL       | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWIN16                  | Windows 3.x  | Watcom | Win16     |              |
|TGTWIN386                 | Windows 3.x  | Watcom | Win16     | 32-bit clean |
|TGTWINNTGCC               | Windows NT   | GCC    | Win32     | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGTWIN64GCC               | Windows NT   | GCC    | Win32     | OpenGL (Opt) |
|TGT\_CECL\_WINCE\_SH3     | Windows CE   | VC     | WinCE     |              |
|TGT\_CECL\_WINCE\_MIPS    | Windows CE   | VC     | WinCE     |              |
|TGT\_CECL\_WINCE\_X86     | Windows CE   | VC     | WinCE     |              |

### retroflt

`#include <retroflt.h>`

RetroFlat is a rough, quick-and-dirty compatibility layer for making graphical programs that work on Win16 (32-bit via OpenWatcom's Win386), MS-DOS (32-bit via DOS/32a or DOS4GW via Allegro), and possibly other platforms in the future.

This documentation is also available at [https://indigoparadox.github.io/maug/group__maug__retroflt.html](https://indigoparadox.github.io/maug/group__maug__retroflt.html).

### mtypes

`#include <mtypes.h>`

Rough common approximation of types for interoperability between our projects.

Includes common types from stdint.h, guaranteed to be of the named size:

 * int8\_t
 * uint8\_t
 * int16\_t
 * uint16\_t
 * int32\_t
 * uint32\_t

When using this header, do not include stdint.h. This header will include it if the current platform supports it. Otherwise, it will improvise.

### uprintf

`#include <uprintf.h>`

An augmented printf for tracing, debugging, and error reporting.

To use, include uprintf.h and call `logging\_init()` in program startup.

Be sure to call `logging\_shutdown()` on program cleanup.

Logging can then be performed by calling:

 * `debug\_printf( lvl, format, ... )` - Prints debug message.
   * `lvl` - Immediacy level of debug message. See DEBUG\_THRESHOLD below.
   * `format` - `printf()`-style format string.
   * `...` - Variable arguments to `format`.
 * `error\_printf( format, ... )` - Prints to stderr.
   * `format` - `printf()`-style format string.
   * `...` - Variable arguments to `format`.

uprintf's behavior can be modified by defining the following before inclusion:

| Define            | Description                                             |
| ------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| platform\_file    | Type to use instead of stdlib's FILE for log ptr.       |
| platform\_fopen   | Function to use instead of fopen() to create a log ptr. |
| platform\_fclose  | Function to close log ptr.                              |
| platform\_fflush  | Function to flush log ptr to buffer.                    |
| platform\_fprintf | Function to print to log ptr with a format string.      |
| DEBUG\_THRESHOLD  | debug\_printf() w/ this or higher lvl will be displayed.|
| DEBUG\_LOG        | If defined, debug will be output to LOG\_FILE\_NAME.    |
| ANCIENT\_C        | Use static functions where vararg macros unsupported.   |

## Troubleshooting

### size of segment x exceeds 64k by y bytes

RetroFlat can be quite bulky for 16-bit DOS. Please try adding RETROFLAT\_DOS\_MEM\_LARGE=1 to your Makefile before Makefile.inc is included to enable a large code model.

### Cache loading errors which retrogxc.h is never included

For 16-bit builds, `GLOBAL\_DEFINES += -DRETROFLAT\_NO\_RETROGXC` must be specified in the Makefile explicitly, or the cache will be enabled in the DOS stubs.

### Emscripten in Debian Complains About FROZEN\_CACHE

Do the following, to create a mutable emscripten cache in your `$HOME`:

 - Make `$HOME/.emscripten` directory.
 - Copy `/usr/share/emscripten/cache/` to `$HOME/.emscripten/cache`
 - Copy `/usr/share/emscripten/.emscripten` to `$HOME/.emscripten/config`
 - In `$HOME/.emscripten/config`:
   * Set `FROZEN\_CACHE = False`.
   * Set `CACHE = '/home/username/.emscripten/cache'`, where `/home/username` is whatever `$HOME` expands to.

After doing this, building with emcc should work.
